---
layout: page
title: Fresher's Guide
---

There are many guides available for new students in Oxford. Different
versions are provided by OUSU (the Oxford University Student Union), the
faculties, the colleges, the common rooms, and other organisations. As
there is plenty of information out there, we did not try to make a
comprehensive document. However, we designed this guide to focus on two
things: first, on what we think are the most important and urgent things
for new students to know and do and, second, on the little details that we
wish we knew as new students, and which in our opinion can make all the
difference. 

<div class="information">
<p><a href="#before-you-arrive">Skip to content</a>;
<a href="javascript:print()">Print this document</a></p>
</div>

{:toc}
1. TOC

## Before you arrive

### Vaccinations

Two important vaccines for people coming to the UK are MMR (Measles, Mumps,
Rubella) and Meningitis C. In line with national policy, the University
recommends that two MMR vaccinations (this does not include the MR vaccine)
are received before arrival; they can be received a month apart. Similarly,
national policy is that any unvaccinated individual attending university,
irrespective of age, should be immunised with the Men C vaccine before they
enrol or as soon as possible thereafter.

Further information about vaccinations is on the Exeter College Graduate
Freshers’ Weblearn site, and on these pages on Mumps
(<http://www.ox.ac.uk/students/shw/health/mumps/>) and Men C
(<http://www.ox.ac.uk/students/shw/health/meningitis/>)

### Border crossing

Carry all the immigration documents that you used to apply for the UK visa
with you in your hand luggage. There have been stories about international
students being asked to produce all of these on their first entry into the
UK. For more information about immigration, see the UK Border Agency site
<http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk>.

### Money

It might take a little bit of time to open a bank account, so make sure you
have access to enough GBP to get through the first little while. Most cash
points in Oxford won’t charge you a fee for making an ATM withdrawal with a
non-UK card, although your home bank will probably impose a transaction
fee. 

If possible, open a UK bank account before you come. (There is more
information below on how to open a bank account.)

### Transport to Oxford 

Oxford is very well-connected to London and the airports by bus and train.

#### From London

If you are coming from London City, the fastest way is to take a train from
Paddington. These run frequently during the day (every half hour or so),
and take about an hour. For schedules, see <http://www.nationalrail.co.uk>.
The cost will differ depending on the tariff, and what rail cards you have.
Peak time is very expensive (early mornings and late afternoons), but a
standard off-peak ticket will cost a little over £20.  To get from the
railway station to Exeter House, either take a Number 3 bus (the stop
closet to Exeter House is outside the Magdalen Arms pub), or a taxi (a taxi
will cost about £10, and taxis are always available at the railway
station). From 30 September, the Number 3 bus is being extended to start at
the Oxford Railway Station, so there will be a direct bus from Exeter House
to the Railway Station from then onwards.

It’s also possible to take the bus from London to Oxford. There are two
services, going from Victoria Station and picking up in central and West
London: the [Oxford Tube](http://www.oxfordtube.com) and the X90. These
services are cheaper than the train; an adult one-way ticket is £13 (return
£16). Although the bus takes longer (at least an hour and a half), it stops
closer to College and Exeter House than the train does. For College, you
could get off either at the High Street or at the terminus (Gloucester
Green). For Iffley the stop you need is St. Clement’s, which is a short
taxi ride or 15-minute walk from Exeter House. Alternatively, you could get
off at the High Street, cross the road, and take **Bus #3** (which leaves from
opposite the Queen’s College) to the Magdalen Arms, which is next to Exeter
House. 

These buses and trains are also relevant should you want to go to London!
If you plan to travel regularly by train it is worth investing in a young
persons railcard (for 16 to 25 year olds). It costs £30 and gives you a 1/3
off rail fare for a year. Similarly if you intend to use the Oxford Tube
service regularly you can purchase an Oxford Tube 12 pass which gives you
12 journeys for £60 making the journeys a little bit cheaper.

The map below shows the relevant bus stops as blue circles, with College and Exeter House marked in yellow.
  
<img src="/images/bus-stops-oxford.png" alt="Bus stops in Oxford"
width="100%">

#### From the airports

The best way to get from the airports to Oxford is by bus. The Oxford Bus
Company runs the **Airline bus service** from both Heathrow and Gatwick. The
buses from Heathrow run every half hour during the day, and from Gatwick
they run every hour. The bus stops for arriving in Oxford on the Airline
are similar to those for the Oxford Tube or the X90.

If you are flying into either Luton or Stansted, the bus ride to Oxford is
longer (especially for Stansted), and is operated by National Express
(<http://www.nationalexpress.com>). It is also possible to transit from
these airports to London by train, though you’ll have to change between
stations in London.

Another alternative is to fly to Birmingham or Southampton, both of which
cites are well-connected to Oxford by train.

#### Coming by car

This can be tricky for central Oxford: Oxford’s mediaeval street pattern
was not designed for motor cars. Many of the streets are one way, and some
streets that look open on the map are actually closed (enforced either by
physical barriers or by CCTV cameras and fines). The only way to get to
Exeter College’s main site in Turl Street is via Parks Road and Broad
Street. 

In coming to Oxford from the north, come down Banbury Road, and turn left
into Parks Road (if you get as far as St Giles’ – a very wide tree-lined
avenue – you have gone too far and need to turn around).  Once on Parks
Road continue to the traffic lights at the end of the street (at the
cross-roads next to the King’s Arms), turn right into Broad Street, then
turn left into Turl Street: here is a map of the route: <http://goo.gl/maps/9wwVx>.

From the East: St. Clement’s to High Street, right into Longwall Street
(with most of the traffic), the road turns left to become South Parks Road,
turn left at the junction into Parks Road, then right into Broad Street at
the King’s Arms, and left into Turl Street: 

Coming by car is much easier for Exeter House
(<http://exetermcr.org/exeter-house>, 235 Iffley Road): there are
barely any road restrictions, and even the road works are finally over!
However, parking at Exeter House is extremely limited, and the city’s
parking wardens are very strict. Exeter House, in effect, provides no
parking for residents, which makes owning a car in Oxford very difficult
(cycling, however, is a very convenient way to get around – see later
sections on this). 


## What you can expect to find in the room, and what you might want to bring

For College accommodation, College provides all the usual essential
furniture. Notably, there will also be a pillow and a duvet in your room
and the wardrobe will have coat hangers included, so don’t bring your own
if you don’t mind using these. The shared kitchen is stocked with plates,
pots, pans, cutlery, a kettle, a toaster, a microwave, an oven and a fridge
and suffices for day-to-day cooking. Other than that, it’s largely up to
you to decorate where you live and although it is College policy that you
can’t stick stuff to the walls, a little creativity goes a long way. Some
of the things to further think about might be: 

* towels, bedding (sheets for a 90x200 cm mattress, pillow cases, a duvet
  cover)
* electrical extension leads, converters to UK plugs (3-pin, 230V), clock,
  alarm clock, bedside lamp, headphones
* specialist cooking utensils (blender, rice cooker, chop sticks, etc.), a
  kettle if you want to make tea in your room and do not want to go to the
  kitchen every time

For some a big relief: both your room and the kitchens will be cleaned by
College housekeeping staff, who are referred to as ‘scouts’. By default,
your room will be cleaned once a week (at most) and your bins will be
emptied every day. If you find this too intrusive or don’t think it is
necessary every week or day, you could place your bin outside of your door
or just discuss with your scout some other mutually agreed arrangement.
They are very nice and a great help. They also vacuum and clean the
kitchens every morning on weekdays, which over time you will come to
appreciate tremendously. However, please be aware that it is not the
scout’s job to make your bed, tidy your room or do the dishes, so they
won’t do it. In general, moral hazard – the phenomenon that you lower your
effort because somebody else cleans up the mess anyway – is a big trap,
please try to avoid it if you can.

Overall, living in Exeter House is very comfortable. As it is modern, it
may lack some charm or the weight ofan old architecture, but at the same
time you won’t have to live in old squeaky, dusty and moist rooms, as is
the student stereotype. The bathroom is great (but check out the light
above the mirror as it is less unforgiving than the main light in early
mornings) and the heating works like a charm, things that genuinely matter
on another rainy day.

Formal dress deserves some special attention, as there are many occasions
in Oxford where you might be required to wear a suit or even black tie:
formal dinners, certain parties, special events, balls etc. In fact, there
are a surprising number of these occasions, and while they are not
compulsory, they tend to be very good fun. 

A special kind of attire that you are guaranteed to need is ‘subfusc’. This
is the clothing ensemble worn for matriculation (the university-wide
ceremony of acceptance to the university), for sitting exams (including
viva voce exams for DPhil students), and for graduation and as such it is
the most official attire. Girls’ sub-fusc has traditionally consisted of a
dark skirt or trousers, black stockings or tights, black shoes, white shirt
with collar and black ribbon tie. Boys’ has traditionally been a dark suit,
white shirt, white bow-tie, dark socks and black shoes. However, as of 2012, there is no actual stipulation to wear gender-specific items
should you wish not to. In practice, this means that you can choose for
yourself whether to wear a skirt or trousers or suit, and you can choose
for yourself whether to wear the black string tie or the white bow tie, or
a black necktie (but your options are still constrained to wearing the
items specified within subfusc – there is no chance to wear bright,
colourful clothing!). There will no longer be any distinction in subfusc
between the sexes, so just choose the clothing that you feel most
comfortable with from the options available. 

Besides subfusc you will also definitely need ‘academic dress’, consisting
of a ‘cap’ and a ‘gown’.  The ‘cap’ could traditionally be a ‘soft cap’ for
women, but these days virtually everyone has the square-shaped
‘mortarboard’: you have to wear your gown, and carry your mortarboard, at
University examinations and ceremonies (matriculation, graduation).

The gown is used surprisingly often, for instance at special dinners.  The
basic gown, if you are studying for a postgraduate degree at Oxford, is
called the Advanced Student’s Gown (sometimes called the Graduate Student’s
Gown).  If you are studying for a second undergraduate degree or for a
diploma (even though you might be a graduate of another University), then
you wear the Commoner’s Gown.  This is the default position; but there are
a few variations, if you want to enjoy them:

* If you have graduated from Oxford, then you are entitled to wear the
  Oxford gown (with, at University examinations and ceremonies, the hood)
  of your previous Oxford degree (or if you were an undergraduate scholar
  at Exeter you may continue to wear your undergraduate scholar’s gown).
  So, if you have just graduated with a BA from Oxford (from any College),
  you can wear your BA gown instead of the advanced student’s gown, and the
  BA gown and hood at your next graduation.  If you are (or become) a DPhil
  student at Oxford who has already graduated with an Oxford Masters (MSt,
  MSc, MPhil, BCL, MJur, and so on), you are entitled to wear your Oxford
  Masters gown (and hood) in place of your advanced student’s gown.
* If you have not graduated from Oxford, but have a degree from any other
  University (except Cambridge University or Trinity College Dublin), then
  you are entitled to wear the gown (with, at University examinations and
  ceremonies, the hood) in which you graduated at your previous University.
* If you have graduated from Cambridge University or Trinity College
  Dublin, then you can do something called “incorporate” your degrees.  If
  you do this, you are entitled to wear at Oxford the same gown that you
  would have gained had you done your Cambridge/TCD degrees here at Oxford.

Do note that subfusc and academic dress officially are two separate things
(although they are often lumped together). To clear up some
further confusion: for many events (for example, the College’s Graduate
Freshers’ Dinner in Week 1 of Michaelmas Term) you need regular (formal)
clothing together with *just your gown*, not with full subfusc as described
above and not with a mortarboard.

All of these items can be bought in Oxford, of course, and you will have at
least two weeks to do this – this is the time from your arrival until
matriculation. Indeed, it’s probably going to be easier to purchase the
gown, ribbon or bow tie, and mortarboard here, but it might be cheaper to
bring your own shoes, suit, skirt, shirts, etc. The gown can be bought from
a number of shops or on rare occasion borrowed from College. The shop
closest to Exeter College is Walters of Oxford, located on Turl Street
opposite Lincoln College; Shepherd & Woodward and Ede & Ravenscroft are a
couple of minutes’ walk away on the High Street. Expect to spend around £40
for the gown, mortarboard and tie, and make sure you pick up the
appropriate gown (the advanced student’s gown is knee-length, while the
commoner’s gown is hip-length).

Archaic as they may seem, the rules of subfusc are actively enforced, as
this gentleman’s bold light sock adventure during exams clearly shows:

<img src="/images/light-sock-adventure.png" width="100%">

## Semi-urgent admin upon arrival

There are a few things that need to be done over your first few days in
Oxford.

### Getting your Bod card

Your Bod card (officially called the “University Card”), which is your
official university ID card, will be handed out by the college staff on
Wednesday of Freshers’ Week at that day’s induction session. However, if
you need it before that (and you probably will), you can come to College
Office to collect it.  The College Office is in the far back corner of
College (ask at the College Porters’ Lodge for directions), and is open
0830–1200 and 1230–1630 Monday to Friday (until 1600 on Friday).

The Bod card allows you access into the University and College buildings –
including Exeter House – and the MCR; you pay for food and drinks in
college with it; you take out library books with it; and it will be checked
when you sit exams. It is very important!  If you ever lose your card, then
you need to request a new card: that is done via the College Office (not
via your Department and not direct to the University Card Office), and
there is a form on the College web-site to help you to request a new card.
If your card is stolen, then it is very important that you report it stolen
and request a replacement quickly, so that whoever stole it is prevented
from entering buildings and pretending to be you.  If you lose your card,
then there is a fee to pay (<http://www.admin.ox.ac.uk/card/lost/>) via the
University store for a replacement, which you have to pay in addition to
requesting a new card via College; if your card is stolen or damaged, then
there is no charge for a replacement.

### Activating your email address and connecting to the internet

The College and the university should provide you with detailed guidance
and the required credentials to get you online. The process can be a bit of
a hassle, but it is very important to complete quickly, as email is the
main means of official communication. Please get in touch with the College
IT department (by e-mail at <mailto:it-help@exeter.ox.ac.uk>, or at their offices near the Bursary) or any of
the MCR committee if you are unable to do this.

You will get two accounts: (1) an Oxford University username, for anything
related to the University and for a remote access account (for accessing
the University’s wiles network, and for accessing restricted resources if
you live out of College or University accommodation) and (2) an Exeter
College login, purely for accessing the College computers, for printing in
College, and, for those in College accommodation, for your first-time
internet access from your room.  Your Oxford University username will be
e-mailed to you by the University (not by Exeter College) when your
University contract has been returned and processed.

Exeter House unfortunately only provides Wi-Fi in the communal areas and
not in all the student rooms, but a LAN cable should be present when you
arrive (otherwise, it can be purchased from college for £3), and simply
plugging it in and starting a browser starts the registration procedure.
The process includes an automatic system scan that ensures that your
computer is up-to-date and in compliance with security requirements, needed
because your connection puts you directly on the main University network.
In case the scan fails because of your antivirus software (it can be
picky), you are directed to download the antivirus software Sophos, which
the University provides free of charge. Wi-Fi registration is a separate
process and is best done after your main connection is in place – details
are on the College website. Again, if you have any trouble with either the
equipment, the activation codes or remote access, please contact the very
helpful IT department.

Lastly, College works with a content filter on the cabled connection. It is
in place mainly to prevent the high bandwidth network being used as a
server for file-sharing (as it would otherwise automatically attract the
lion share of traffic), but College has also deemed some other content
inappropriate. In practice this means for instance no torrents and no
explicit material. Rest assured that freedom of information stays paramount
and that the restrictions are very limited, and if there is anything
whatsoever that you feel should be accessible, you could always make a
case. Also note that the Wi-Fi networks are not filtered, which makes
accessing a particular type of things a bit easier.

More information at
<http://www.exeter.ox.ac.uk/currentstudents/computing/internet/>.

### Register with the Police

International students from some countries need to do this immediately upon
arrival (it will say so on your visa if you need to register with the
police). The main police station is on St. Aldates, about a 10-minute walk
from the main College site. You’ll pay £34 and get a registration
certificate, which you should keep safe. If you need to register with the
police on arrival, you’ll also have to report any official changes to the
police to be recorded on your certificate, for instance if you get a new
passport, or if you change address during your time in the UK. 

The police have a registration desk at the University’s International
Student Orientation Programme on Friday, 28 September, which saves you a
trip to the police station.  More information at
<http://www.ox.ac.uk/students/international_students/visaduring/police/>.

Upon arrival, international students will also need to present passports
and visas to the College Office so they can scan them for their records.

### Open a bank account

Life is very hard without a bank account (and something in it!). If you
have not worked or studied in the UK before (or have somehow managed until
now to do so without a UK current account), then you will need one whilst
at Oxford.  To open one, you have two main options: (1) do it whenever you
like by going to the bank itself or (2) go to the International Students'
Orientation Programme (on Thursday 27 September and Friday 28 September at
Exam Schools, just before Freshers' Week) or the Freshers Fair (this takes
place in Freshers’ Week), where representatives of the whole range of banks
will be present (more on the Freshers’ Fair below). In our experience, the
banks’ offers at the Fair are not different from what they otherwise are. 

To open a bank account, the main document you’ll need is proof of
enrolment. The Freshers’ pack you receive from college will have a letter
which you can take to the bank as proof of this. If the bank does not
accept this letter, you can print a more official one from the Student
Self-Services (<http://www.ox.ac.uk/students/>) though bear in mind that to
be valid it needs to be stamped with the college stamp, which can be done
at the College Office). If the bank asks for any other documents, please
email <mailto:college.office@exeter.ox.ac.uk> with details of what the bank
requires, to see if the College can help. 

The banks are located mainly on Cornmarket Street (parallel to Turl Street,
the other side of Jesus College): Barclays, HSBC, Lloyds, and NatWest are
all represented. Santander is round the corner at Carfax.

Opening a bank account can be a frustrating and longer than expected
procedure. Persevere!

### Student Insurance

Be aware that the contents of your room are not automatically insured. If
you want to get insurance, it is easily done through for instance your bank
or by googling specialised student insurers. In our experience the large
majority of Exeter House residents choose not to insure and express little
regret over it afterwards. However, the College strongly recommends that
you insure your personal possessions: unfortunately, and although Oxford is
broadly a safe city, thefts (especially of re-saleable items, such as
laptops, iPads, iPods, and bicycles) happen all too frequently. Prices for
possessions’ insurance vary, but expect to pay around £5-10 per month. 

### College “Parents”

The College Parenting system is an arrangement by which incoming students
are each matched with a current Exeter grad studying a similar subject who
has volunteered to look after a new student and to help them settle in.
This system is very informal and voluntary on both sides – you will not be
matched with a parent if you would prefer otherwise, and you are free to
interact with your parent as often or infrequently as you wish. Most people
find the arrangement to be very helpful and a fun way of getting to know
people – college families tend to extend over several generations! Don’t be
shy about asking your college parents any questions you might have about
Oxford, whether academic, or to do with life in the city or in the UK –
they have each specifically volunteered for this very purpose and will
welcome the opportunity to help you so far as they can. 

Your college parent will ideally contact you before you come up to Oxford;
however, some may find themselves abroad for research or field work over
the summer, with limited access to email. If you haven’t heard anything
from your parent by mid-September, please let the Freshers’ Rep know
(Esther Kwan, <mailto:esther.kwan@exeter.ox.ac.uk>). She will contact
your parent and attempt to sort out any confusion. 

### Don’t miss the University Freshers’ Fair

This is the only time in the year when all of Oxford’s Clubs and Societies
– with interests ranging from sports to music to national spirit to
spirituality to charities to politics – put their representatives in one
place. This is the best place to find out what Oxford has to offer outside
of studies, and to join in the life of the university community by signing
up for whatever groups capture your interest.

Each college is given a time slot during Freshers’ Week when its new
students may attend the fair, which is held in the Examination Schools on
High Street. Closer to the date, Exeter’s time slot will be announced and
you will each be provided with a ticket allowing you entry. While you may
go to the venue on your own if you wish, all Freshers are invited to gather
in the MCR fifteen minutes before the given time in order to walk over to
as a group. 

*Exeter students can attend the Freshers’ Fair between TODO*.

In addition to the university-wide Freshers’ Fair, there is an Exeter
College fair on . . . . This is organised by the JCR and is designed to
show you some of the clubs and societies on offer within the college.
Joining a college team is a great opportunity to try something new, as in
most cases no previous experience is needed.

## After the initial shock is over

### College Facilities

#### MCR (Middle Common Room)

The MCR is a suite of six rooms (situated in Staircase 6 in College)
specifically appointed for the use of graduates and comprises two sitting
rooms, a kitchen, study room, computer room, and washroom. Here you can
relax, drink free coffee or tea, make food in the kitchen, read newspapers,
play board-games and the piano, use college computers (of which there are
four), do your printing and scanning, stash your things in a private
locker, and socialise in general. It is warm in winter, cool in the summer
and is basically the best place in College. 

#### JCR (Junior Common Room)

Place to socialise with undergrads; it has a water fountain, vending
machines, and Sky TV.

#### Library

A lovely, cosy place to hole up for an afternoon of studying, the College
library is open 24 hours a day and has a decent, although not exhaustive
collection of texts.  Graduates can borrow up to 20 books for the whole
term and the library is happy to receive suggestions from you for purchase;
see the library website for details:
<http://www.exeter.ox.ac.uk/college/library/>.

It can get very busy with undergrads during exam periods, during which
times the MCR will often reserve some additional study spaces for graduates
throughout the College. Some grads also work in the library during the
early mornings and the evenings to make some extra cash.

#### Hall

Breakfast, lunch and dinner are available in hall on weekdays, and brunch
and dinner on weekends. Meals are served buffet-style, cost £2-3 (though
beware: you get charged for whatever you take, however small the portion),
and are very filling if often a bit heavy. There is also usually a
selection of delicious salads available in the sidebar. 

Buffet timings are as follows:

* Breakfast: 8 am – 9 am
* Lunch: 12.30 pm – 1.30 pm
* Dinner: 6 pm – 6.40 pm

Formal Hall, a more elegant served three-course dinner, is offered on
Sunday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday at 7:15pm. Formal dress and
academic gowns required, and you must sign up and pay in advance online,
usually by 1:30pm on the day, though Sunday Dinner lists close at 1.30 pm
on the preceding Friday.

Members of the MCR have graduate high table rights.

There is also a Pick-and-Pay cafeteria in the bar on weekdays of term from
8am to 3:30pm, serving breakfast items until 10am and an assortment of
sandwiches, panini, salad, soup, soft drinks, coffee, fruit, and snacks in
the afternoon. 

In-person payment is accomplished by swiping your Bod card, which you must
pre-load with money credits. This can be done either in the Lodge during
the day, the bar at night, or online (more information about this will be
sent to you by the Catering Office).  Your Bod card will be pre-loaded with
£20 when you arrive (that £20 will be charged to your College bill) so that
you can buy food in Hall before you have worked out how to load your Bod
card with credits.

The bar also accepts cash after 6pm. 

#### Porters’ Lodge

Here you can find very helpful people available 24 hours a day; however,
from midnight until 6 a.m. they are available **in an emergency only**.  The
Porters will receive (and sign for) parcels on your behalf (if they are
addressed to you at: Exeter College, Turl Street, Oxford, OX1 3DP, United
Kingdom), but please ensure that any parcels are collected promptly, as the
Lodge has no spare space to store parcels.  The Porters can also answer
your questions or direct you to the right person in college, and basically
help you out in general. The post-room and “pidges” (pigeon holes) where
students’ mail is deposited, is also in the Lodge. 

Sometimes you will see graduate students working part-time in the Lodge:
these are recruited and trained by the Head Lodge Porter, when a vacancy
occurs. 

#### Chapel

Located in the Front Quad, the stunning Victorian Chapel is one of the
buildings of which Exeter is most proud. During term it hosts regular
morning and evening prayer services as well as three Evensongs per week.
The latter are particularly good opportunities to hear the college choir,
which is recognized as one of the best in the University and well worth a
listen. 

#### Balsdon Room

The main computer room in College has a large number of computers,
printers, scanners and a photocopier. Located underground in the Back Quad
and accessed by swiping your Bod card.

## Fellows Garden

The Fellows Garden is open from 2pm to 8pm and is a great place to relax
and unwind, it also boasts the “best view in Oxford” over the Radcliffe
Camera. Croquet facilities are available from the Porter’s Lodge for a £5
deposit and can be played in the Fellow Garden.

## College Punts
As a member of the MCR you have access to the college punt free of charge.
This service is available during term-time and you can reserve the punt at
the Porter’s Lodge 24 hours prior to when you want to use it.

## Iffley Road Gym
The Oxford University gym and swimming pool is located on Iffley Road
(conveniently close to Exeter House). In addition to the gym and pool there
are squash courts, tennis courts, an athletics track and more. There is
also a small gym in college, in the basement of staircase 11, it has a
treadmill, rowing machines, weights and multi-gym equipment. This is a free
facility but you will need to complete an induction session. These are held
in the first weeks of Michaelmas Term and you can sign up to a session at
the Porter’s Lodge.


#### Exeter House Facilities

Communal areas are the Pavilion (post-room and TV room) and the Chapel Room
(games, piano, computers). For more details see the guide to Exeter House
<http://exetermcr.org/exeter-house>.

### What to do if you’ve lost your Bod card or Keys?

If you lose your Bod card and are unable to access your building or room,
you can contact the College Lodge (01865 279600). They can let you in (they
have remote control of the electronic gate and doors), and can also give
you a temporary card, issued from the Lodge until you can get a
replacement.

To get a replacement Bod card, you need to fill in a form requesting this
(available from the College website), and to drop this into the College
Office.  Your replacement card will be sent to the College Office for you
to collect.  Lost Bod cards cost £10 to replace, which you have to pay at
the University’s online store (see:
<http://www.admin.ox.ac.uk/card/lost/>). If your Bod card is irreparably
damaged, or stolen, then there is no replacement fee.  

If you lose your Exeter House room key, you will need to contact Jim Dobson
(01865 245472) who is available on weekdays during office hours.  Out of
hours, contact TODO, the Hostels Warden who lives in a flat at
Exeter House (TODO), or the College Lodge (01865 279600), in order
to be given a temporary key. Replacement keys can be obtained at a cost of
£50.

### How to get forms signed by College

From time to time, you will need to get a form signed by your College.
Here’s how:

If you need a form signed by the “Tutor for Graduates” (who in Exeter
College is also known as the Academic Dean – see below), then hand it into
the Porters’ Lodge or the College Office, FAO the Academic Dean, with a
short cover note explaining what you want done, and to whom the form should
be sent next (i.e. returned to you, sent to someone else for signing,
etc.).  These forms will include things like: Transfer of Status,
Confirmation of Status, Appointment of Examiners.  Forms are usually signed
and returned quite quickly; but it’s best not to leave things to the last
minute to get signatures!

If you need a form signed by someone else on behalf of College, then drop
it in at the Porters’ Lodge for them, or contact them in advance if you
have a query.  If you are not sure who needs to sign something, please drop
it into the College Office to seek help.

### Medical Information

#### The way it works

Health services for students are basically free, as students are covered by
the NHS (the National Health Service). This means that you can go make an
appointment with a doctor, be admitted to hospital, or go to A&E (Accidents
and Emergencies, also known, rather worryingly, as “Casualty” = the
Emergency Room) at the hospital free of charge. 

The first port of call outside of an emergency is the GP, General
Practitioner, who can deal with most ailments and can write prescriptions.
All prescriptions cost £7.65 per course of treatment, regardless of the
actual amount of medicine (i.e. it can be one box or 10 for the same price,
as long as it’s the same course of treatment). If the GP cannot deal with
the issue, he will refer you to a specialist.  Note, however, that some
prescriptions, such as contraception, are made *completely free of charge*.

If it’s an emergency, the number to dial is 999. This will get you an
ambulance (if you are in a genuine emergency situation, ambulances do not
charge for a call-out). If you need to go to A&E but you don’t require an
ambulance, the easiest way is to call a taxi (info on this is given below
in a separate section). The Oxford hospital is called the John Radcliffe,
or the JR for short, and is located in Headington:
<http://www.oxfordradcliffe.nhs.uk/aboutus/hospitals/jr.aspx>.

If it is not an emergency, but you need urgent medical advice (or think you
need to see a doctor urgently) out of working hours, you should ring your
GP's surgery. You will be connected to the Out of Hours Service and a local
on-duty GP will telephone you back, usually pretty rapidly. If you need to
be seen, you will probably be directed to the Out of Hours Centre, which is
located at Manzil Way (off Cowley Road).

If you have an ailment that may not be serious enough to bother a doctor
with, but for which you still want some advice, then you can consult a
pharmacist.  Pharmacies can give simple medical advice and offer you some
medicines without prescription, including emergency contraception.
Pharmacies are also the places to go to collect your prescription, if your
GP prescribes some medicine for you. Some pharmacies open out of hours, and
can give advice when a doctor is not open (for example, on the weekend, or
on a public holiday).  The closest pharmacies to the main College site are
located inside Boot’s (Cornmarket St) and Boswell’s (Broad St/Cornmarket
St); the closest to Exeter House are Jenner’s (East Oxford Health Centre,
Manzil Way), and Boot’s (Cowley Road)

The NHS also run a website, called NHS Direct
(<http://www.nhsdirect.nhs.uk>), that allows you to check
symptoms, and get reliable information on conditions, treatments, ‘what to
do next’, etc.

As well as public medicine, there is also a private hospital in Oxford, but
this is very expensive if you don’t have private health insurance. 

For more information, see the University pages on Health:
<http://www.ox.ac.uk/students/shw/health/>

#### Our doctors

As a student at Exeter, you are required to register with the College
Doctor, or another GP practice in Oxford, unless you are given explicit
permission by the College not to do so.  The default option is for you to
register with the College Doctor: 

    Dr Kenyon & Partners
    19 Beaumont Street Surgery
    19 Beaumont Street
    Oxford
    OX1 2NA
    TEL: 01865 240501
    FAX: 01865 240503
    <http://www.19beaumontstgp.nhs.uk>

**Registration forms, on the College’s Graduate Freshers’ Weblearn pages,
need to be filled in and returned directly to the doctor (not the College)
before you arrive in Oxford.**

Your induction during Freshers’ Week in college will include a talk from a
representative of the surgery, so you’ll get a lot more information about
this.  

Although 19 Beaumont Street Surgery is known as the “College Doctor”, it is
worth remembering that their service to you is **completely confidential**:
they will not say anything about your healthcare to the College, or your
Department, or indeed anyone else, unless you explicitly authorise them to
do so.  They are the College Doctor because they guarantee NHS registration
to every Exeter College student, and they are experienced in dealing with
many of the issues that Oxford students have (they are also very
experienced at writing helpful reports if your studies have been affected
by your health). As well as being the main doctor for Exeter College, and
for seven other Oxford Colleges, they also have a lot of non-student
patients, too. Spouses and dependent family members of Exeter students are
also eligible to register for the NHS and College doctor.   

It is also worth noting that regular appointments can be very hard to come
by at short notice, and the earliest you might be offered could be several
days away. **If you want a same-day appointment**, call the Surgery at 8 am
sharp (i.e. just as the surgery opens in the morning), as emergency
appointments and cancellation are released daily at that time.

#### Our dentist

If you need a Dentist, you are can use Studental.  However, the College
makes no requirement to register with a dentist, and many students keep
their dentist back home as their regular dentist:

    Studental
    Helena Kennedy Student Centre
    Oxford Brookes University
    Headington Hill Campus
    Headington Road
    Oxford
    OX3 0BP
    <reception@studental.co.uk>
    TEL: 01865 484608

When you phone for an appointment you just need to say which college you
are from and to take your student card with you as proof. There are
leaflets about Studental outside the Exeter College nurse's room (Staircase
7, ground floor).

#### The College nurse

The College nurse, Sarah Dragonetti, deals with minor ailments, dressings etc. She
is on duty on most days of the week, and can be found in room 7:1 or
contacted on 01865 279639.

#### First aid

Emergencies requiring First Aid should be notified as soon as possible to
the Lodge (01865 279600) or to the appropriate Hostel Warden. (Lists of
First Aiders are also published on notice boards around the college
premises, and include the lodge staff, the Junior Dean, and the Exeter
House Warden.)

Emergency Medical boxes are kept at College in the Lodge, the Kitchen and
the College Office, and at Exeter House and Stapeldon House.

In medical emergencies when First Aid is not adequate arrangements will be
made by the Duty Porter to transport the patient to hospital.

#### Other health issues

For eye emergencies, call the Oxford Eye Hospital in the JR. The 24 hour
emergency number is 01865 234800.

The GUM (Genito-Urinary Medicine) clinic is in the Churchill Hospital,
which is part of the JR complex. The link to their website can be found
here.

Contraception is available free from the doctors or at the Alec Turnbull
Clinic on Cowley Road. A condom machine is located at the bottom of
Staircase 6. Limited emergency supplies will be kept in the MCR washroom. 

While it’s possible to go see an NHS (i.e. free) physiotherapist, the
waiting times are generally very long for this, and most people see private
physios. There are a number of those in Oxford, and if you ask around you
can probably get to see a very good one!

### Bikes

Cycling is a very convenient way to get around town. 

To get a bike, you could buy it new or second hand from the many bike shops
around town: Bike Zone in the city centre on St. Michael Street, Reg Taylor
Cycles on Iffley Road 3 minutes’ walk from Exeter House (in the direction
away from the city), a number of shops on Cowley (Cycloanalysts and Beeline
are particular favourites, students report that they prefer these to Cycle
King). It is worth shopping around for special start-of-term deals, which
usually include a helmet, a lock, and lights. The Oxford Union also do an
annual start-of year bike sale, and there are many bikes being sold person
to person on the internet. As bike theft is one of the most common crimes
in Oxford, it is worth investing in a strong D-lock rather than a simple
chain.  If your bike is stolen, please report it to the Police on their
non-emergency number (dial: 101); if you see a theft in progress, then
please call the Police emergency number (999).

In order to leave your bike at Exeter House or Exeter College, you must
register it at the Porters’ Lodge on Main Site. They will provide you with
a sticker and number to identify your bike. 

Remember: you are legally obliged to use lights after dark, and the police
like to apprehend cyclists without lights. The requirements are: a white
light (not green or amber) at the front, red at the rear; both affixed to
your bicycle and not to you or your backpack; both working, and both
conforming with required standards. A helmet is not a legal requirement,
but is definitely recommended. It’s against the law in the UK to cycle on
pavements (unless there are signs indicating that bicycles are allowed),
and in pedestrianized streets (like Cornmarket and Queen Street during the
daytime – the police like to apprehend cyclists here, too), so please leave
the pavements for people on foot. Also, if you’re unused to cycling on the
left and especially to navigating UK round-abouts (especially The Plain,
which is a big 5-exit roundabout part-way between Exeter House and the main
College site), be extra careful. Don’t be shy to ask other MCR members or
you college parents to walk you through things or cycle with you the first
time! 

The official statement of law on cycling in Great Britain (the Highway
Code) is available at <https://www.gov.uk/rules-for-cyclists-59-to-82>.  A
useful guide to cycling in Oxford has been produced by local organization
Cyclox: <http://www.cyclox.org/cycling-in-oxford/>

If you do buy a bike and it is damaged or otherwise immobilised, Back on
Trax offer an excellent pick-up and repair service with reasonable prices.
Details at <http://www.backontrax.co.uk>. There is also a Bike Doctor at the
University Club, on Mansfield Rd. near the science campus, on Wednesdays
from 10am-4pm. Arrive early.

### Taxis and buses

There are two kinds of taxis available in Oxford. One kind is the
London-style cab (called “Hackney Carriages”) that you can hail off the
street. These have an orange light on the front when they are available for
hire.  The other kind, which tends to be substantially cheaper than Hackney
Carriages, is called the private hire vehicle: this is the one that you
need to call to book your journey. At night it is often better to ring up
and book a journey than to walk onto the street and try to hail a cab; not
only are you more likely to get a car, but this is also generally a safer
alternative, as your call is recorded, and the journey is registered. There
are lots of radio-cab companies in Oxford, and you can call them at any
time of day or night. Two examples of numbers you can call are 01865 77 88
66 (Royal Cars – <http://www.royal-cars.com/royalcars>) a well-recommended
company), and 01865 24 24 24 (001 Taxis). If you have worries about taxi
safety, here is how to make a complaint:
<http://www.oxford.gov.uk/PageRender/decB/TaxisSafetyandComplaints>.

OUSU also runs a service called the Safety Bus, a minibus service run by
volunteers. To use the service simply ring 07714 445050 between 9 p.m.–3
a.m. Monday to Saturdays and 9 p.m.–1 a.m. on Sundays. The bus will pick
you up and deliver you to any destination within the ring road for £1
donation per trip. Priority will always be given to vulnerable people and
individuals as the emphasis for the scheme is on safety. However, the bus
is not always available: as the service depends on volunteers, it is not
able to run on nights when volunteers are not available to help out; in
addition, there is only one bus, and many people who want to use it.

Buses in Oxford run on a radial pattern: from the outskirts into the centre
and back. The bus that goes down Iffley Road is number 3 to Rose Hill (3N
at night), and the closest stop to Exeter House is called Magdalen Road. A
single trip to the centre is £1.80, but it’s possible to buy season tickets
and other package deals. The bus runs every 7-8 minutes during the day and
every 15 minutes at night, On weekdays, the last day bus back down Iffley
Road towards Rose Hill leaves the Bonn Square stop number D4 at 23.50 – one
additional, more expensive nightbus (N3) leaves at 00.10. On Friday and
Saturday nights, the N3 will contintue to depart from Bonn Square half
hourly until 03.10. As routes and timetables do change from time to time,
please check <http://www.stagecoach.com> for the most up to date information.

### Mobile phones

You effectively have three options:

1.	Pay-as-you-go, which costs more per minute but requires no bank account to set up. Buy a SIM card and handset and you’re good to go!
2.	Pay monthly. You can typically cancel these with one month’s notice, and they offer better rates than pay-as-you-go. Great if you leave the country for the summer, or are only here for a year. You will need a bank account and credit check.
3.	Contract (typically 18 or 24 months). These offer best deals, and are the cheapest way to get a smart phone, but require some commitment, a bank account and credit check.

Shop around for the best deal, and be patient. If you need a phone now and
don’t have a bank account, you can pick up cheap pay-as-you-go handsets for
the short term.

The highest concentration of phone shops is on and around Cornmarket
Street, where there is a Carphone Warehouse, a Three shop, Phones4U (though
this has very mixed reviews), a Vodaphone shop, and an Orange shop. There
is also an Orange shop in the Westgate Centre, an Apple store in Broad
Street, and an O2 store in the Clarendon Centre. 

Signal in Oxford is passable, and Vodafone have the best reputation for
good coverage here. Inside many buildings, however, which unfortunately
includes Exeter House, you will have intermittent or no reception. Many
rooms have reliable ‘hot spots’ in window sills and the likes. Find yours!

Three (3) is generally considered to be one of the cheaper networks,
especially for smartphone packages, and Lebara mobile offer good
international rates. However, there is always Skype!

### Shopping

The main grocery stores in Oxford are Tesco and Sainsbury’s. Opening times
for most city grocery shops are from about 7 in the morning till 11 or 12
at night. Sunday opening hours are substantially reduced, often open
between 11 in the morning until about 5 in the afternoon. Nevertheless,
there are a few small shops (Sainsbury’s in particular) that have the same
opening schedule on Sunday as on weekdays, i.e. until 11 pm (on the Plain)
or midnight (on Magdalen Street). For fresh produce, also check out the
friendly grocers in the Covered Market, the local farmers’ markets on
Saturday mornings behind the Tesco on Cowley, and the market every 1st and
3rd Thursday of the month on Gloucester Green. For good prices on fruit and
veg, go to the Gloucester Green Wednesday market.

The main health and hygiene shop is Boot’s, and there are big branches on
Cornmarket and on Cowley. Boot’s and Boswell’s, on Cornmarket also include
pharmacies.

For random household stuff, go to Boswell’s on Broad Street, or Argos on
New Inn Hall Street off of Bonn Square. It’s also worth taking a look at
Poundland in the Westgate Centre for an inexpensive if erratic spread of
household items, toiletries, humorous gifts, and snacks.

The main academic bookshop is Blackwell’s on Broad Street.

Oxford also has a good selection of charity shops, which offer inexpensive
second-hand clothing and books in aid of various charities. Oxfam has
well-stocked second-hand bookshops on St Giles’ (near the Eagle & Child
pub) and in Turl Street.  Cowley Road (near Exeter House) and Headington
both have several useful charity shops.

### Welfare

Welfare is Oxford's term for the various support structures in place that
serve to deal with students’ problems, whatever these may be. This section
will focus mainly on the College's welfare system, but will also mention
some University-wide schemes. 

#### MCR Graduate Welfare Officer

The MCR Graduate Welfare Officers are Esther Kwan and Ben Cousins. They
represent and deal with the general concerns of all members of the
graduate community in the areas of welfare, personal security,
accommodation and academic needs. They can be contacted by email at
<mailto:welfare@exetermcr.org>.

#### Tutor for Graduates

The Academic Dean (Dr Chris Ballinger) is the College’s Tutor for
Graduates.  He is responsible for the academic and personal welfare of
graduate students in the college, and he can be contacted at
<mailto:chris.ballinger@exeter.ox.ac.uk> and 79678 on the internal telephone (add
‘01865 2’ if you are calling from outside of the university phone network,
for example from a mobile phone).  His College room is high above the
Porters’ Lodge on Staircase 1.  Dr Ballinger is happy to see any graduate
student who wishes to consult him.

You will also be assigned a College Adviser, who will be a Fellow (senior
academic professor) of the College who is working in a similar academic
area to you, and to whom you can direct any academic or other issues.  

#### Women's Adviser

The Women's Adviser (Ms. Jeri Johnson, Staircase 4:1, internal tel. 79608)
is available to assist with the personal or academic difficulties of women
students at Exeter.

#### Chaplain

The College Chaplain (Andrew Allen)
offers counsel and pastoral support to all members of Exeter College,
regardless of their religious beliefs. The Freshers' Fair will also include
representatives from the different spiritual communities at Oxford.

#### Tea and Cakes

The Welfare Officer holds a Tea and Cakes event every Friday in the MCR at
4 pm. All members of the MCR are invited. There is ample cake, tea, coffee,
cheese, fruit, etc.: hopefully something to everyone’s taste. This is a
good opportunity to catch up with people (or make new friends), and chill
out at the end of the week.

#### Peer Support

The list of peer supporters is available on various notice boards around
college. You can see a list of peer supporters at <http://exetermcr.org/peer-supporters>.

#### Financial aid

There is a lot of financial aid available from various sources, and
announcements for scholarship applications are frequently circulated on the
mailing lists. The University prospective student pages have a number of
resources on them, as do the college funding pages. Here, we draw your
attention to three types of college-based funding.

#### Graduate Scholarships

The College offers various scholarships. Special attention should be drawn
to the Amelia Jackson Scholarships, which are available to existing Exeter
graduates only. The studentship pays College fees, University fees up to
the “Home/EU” rate, and a maintenance grant for a period of one year.
Usually two to three awards are granted each year.  It is advertised early
in Trinity Term: keep an eye out for it.

#### Grants for travel and conferences

The College makes grants to enable graduate students to travel to
conferences related to their research. Forms are available on the College
website: <http://www.exeter.ox.ac.uk/currentstudents/office/forms>.

#### Hardship grants

It is a condition of admission that graduate students can demonstrate that
they are able to meet the full expenses of their intended course; Mention
that, though there is some time to do paid work, there is very little, and
no one can expect to have time to “work their way through College” as a
graduate student at Oxford, especially as the vacations are for scademic
work, not for paid employment. However, in special cases the College can
also make grants and loans to alleviate genuinely unexpected financial
hardship. Forms can be found in our ‘downloads’ section or on the internal
pages of the Exeter College website.  The University also has limited
hardship funding:
<http://www.ox.ac.uk/feesandfunding/graduates/targetedsupport/hardship/>.

#### Nightline

Nightline 01865 (2)70270 is a confidential listening, support and
information service run by students for students, operating between 8pm and
8am every night from 0th week to 9th week. You can either call them (or
drop into their office at 16 Wellington Square); they can call you back and
you can talk about anything that might be bothering you. 

#### The Student Advice Service 

The Student Advice Service is a confidential listening and advice service
and aims to provide a space for students to talk over their worries in
confidence, and to offer advice on a range of issues which students might
encounter during their time at Oxford. Members of the service can provide
you both with practical advice as well as with support for personal issues.
The advisers are all experienced in dealing with students and are committed
to helping you in a supportive environment. The Service runs during office
hours and you can either drop into OUSU at Thomas Hull House on New Inn
Hall Street (although you might have to wait for the appropriate member of
the service to be free) or make an appointment by calling OUSU on 01865
288450/1 or by emailing <mailto:advice@ousu.org>.

#### Other resources

Other welfare resources are available on the Oxford Welfare Services
website. Another resource worth keeping in mind is the OUSU Mind Your Head
Campaign: <http://mindyourheadoxford.wordpress.com/>

### Graduation

It may seem odd to have a message about graduation in a guide aimed at
people who have yet to start their course.  However, there is nothing like
planning ahead!  And thinking about this is especially important if you are
on a 1-year course and want to arrange for family and friends to travel to
Oxford to celebrate with you when you finish your course.

Students (apart from trainee medical doctors) are not told a specific date
on which they will graduate; rather, they need to book a preferred date
(which must be after their results have been confirmed!).  In the past it
was quite difficult to get a date for a degree ceremony except long in
advance; but a new system has made booking easier.  Taught course students
will,  in the November of the last academic year of their course, receive
an invitation to book a date for their graduation.  They will then be able
to book a date on which they would like to graduate, so that they (and
their families) can plan ahead.  Research students cannot plan quite so
precisely when their degree will be complete, so they will receive a
booking invitation once they have “leave to supplicate”, which is the
confirmation that they have passed their degree course.

## Contact Information

* Freshers’ Rep: Esther Kwan,
  <mailto:freshers-representative@exetermcr.org>
* President: Challenger Mishra, <mailto:president@exetermcr.org>
* VP: John Nickerson, <mailto:vice-president@exetermcr.org>
* Treasurer: Francisca Gale, <mailto:treasurers@exetermcr.org>
* Welfare Officers: Esther Kwan and Ben Cousins, <mailto:welfare@exetermcr.org>
* Social Secretaries: Andreas Harris, Joe Tarrant and Imogen Parry, <mailto:social@exetermcr.org>
* IT Officer: Abhishek Dasgupta, <mailto:it@exetermcr.org>

### Glossary

MCR
: Middle Common Room, refers both to the actual room, and to the graduate student body.

JCR
: Junior Common Room, refers both to the actual room, and to the undergraduate student body.

SCR
: Senior Common Room, refers both to the actual room, and to the body of College Fellows and other College officials. It is also off-limits to students, except on special occasions like the annual Graduate High Table in Trinity.

Battels
: The termly bill that students pay to College. Main item is rent (if you live in college accommodation), but other items could be the catering charge, printing charges, library overdue fines, sports levies, etc.

**We hope you have an amazing time in Oxford!**

